# Read Me - AWS Data Warehouse

### Project: Data Warehouse

## Introduction

This project builds an  an ETL pipeline for a music streaming startup, Sparkify, that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for analytics insights. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.


## Source Data
The source data in S3 is located in the following paths:

* Song Dataset - The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
    
    Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data

* Log Dataset - The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

    Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
    Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json


## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets a star schema is created that consists of the following tables.

#### Fact Table

* songplays - Records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
    fields: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables
* users - Users in the app
    fields: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
* songs - Songs in music database
    fields: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
* artists - Artists in music database
    fields: artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
* time - Timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    fields: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Files
The project includes the following files:

* `create_resources.py`  creates the IAM role and the redshift client as well as deletes any existing IAM role and redshift cluster existing with the same name
* `create_table.py`  creates the staging tables for the events and songs, as well as the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
* `etl.py`  loads data from S3 buckets into staging tables on Redshift and then processes that data into the star schema tables on Redshift.
* `sql_queries.py`  defines the SQL statements to be used from source files to S3 and from S3 to redshift using create_tables.py and etl.py.
* `dwh.cfg` lists the parameters of the Redshift cluster and source data paths 

## How to Run Scripts

* Fill in `dwh.cfg` file with your `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` and `DWH PASSWORD`. Save file
* Run file `create_resources.py` in order to create the IAM role, the Redshift cluster and establish a TCP connection to the cluster
* Fill in `CLUSTER/HOST` and `IAM_ROLE/ARN` in the `dwh.cfg` file with   from `create_resources.py` output
* Run file `create_tables.py` to create all necessary tables in Redshift
* Run file `ETL.py` to transfer data from S3 into Redshift
* (optional) Re-run file `create_resources.py` to delete IAM Role and delete cluster

## Further improvements

* Add data quality checks
* Create a dashboard for analytic queries on new database
